README.md, before:

# Ray Casting System for Oric Computers

## Getting started

If you have [git](https://git-scm.com/downloads) installed on your PC, you can download the current version with the command:

``` bat
git clone https://github.com/oric-software/castoric
```

If you don't have git, you can download an archive of the projet by clicking the download link provided on [this page](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric).

Once the repository is retrieved or the archive uncompressed, you should have a `castoric` directory created into which you can go:

```bat
cd castoric
```

If you have [python](www.python.org) (3.8.5 or above) and [PIL](https://pypi.org/project/Pillow/) library installed, you can rebuild all generated files before rebuilding the tap file. 

```bat
cd castoric

.\build.bat
```

The script [build.bat](build.bat): 

- generates precalculed lookup table
- generates texel palette 
- generates some header
- generates texture buffers from image files

But if don't have Python and PIL, you can't rebuild the tap file by using default pregenerated files that come with this repository. 

```bat
cd proto\c 

osdk_build.bat && osdk_execute.bat
```




## Getting deeper into castoric

- [Camera](#camera)

- [Viewport](#viewport)

- [Scene](#scene)

- [Raycast](#raycast)

- [Render](#render)

- [Texel](#texel)

- [Texture](#texture)


--- 
## Camera <a name="camera"></a>

[[camera_situation]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=camera_situation)


Camera is the point from which the scene is beeing seen.
It is stored in three bytes:
- `rayCamPosX`  and `rayCamPosY` are signed 2D cartesian coordinates that belong to interval `[-128 .. 127]`
- `rayCamRotZ` is a signed angle within `[-128 .. 127]`

``` C
signed char             rayCamPosX = 0;
signed char             rayCamPosY = 0;
signed char             rayCamRotZ = 0;
```

One other variable that has to be maintained when the camera angle is changed is the angle at which the raycasting start.

It is stored in a variable named `RayLeftAlpha` and should be set the following way each time the value of `rayCamRotZ` is changed.

``` C
signed char RayLeftAlpha = rayCamRotZ+ HALF_FOV_FIX_ANGLE;
```


which basically reflects that the leftmost angle of the field of view is camera angle + half the size of the field of view.

The constant `HALF_FOV_FIX_ANGLE` is automatically elaborated by script `build.bat` depending on the configuration of the viewport. 


--- 
## Viewport Configuration <a name="viewport"></a>

[[config_viewport]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=config_viewport)


[[config_generate]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=config_generate)


The viewport is the part of the screen where we want the scene to be rendered. Dimensions and position of this viewport are configured in file `tools/config.py` expressed in [Texel]((#texel)) (which are basiclaly 3*3 pixels square on screen).  

Viewport is configured through following parameters:


- `HFOV_IN_DEGREES` : is the angle of Horizontal Field Of View expressed in degrees.
- `VIEWPORT_WIDTH`  : expressed in number of texel. It is the number of column. It must belong to interval `[24 .. 78]`
- `VIEWPORT_HEIGHT`  : expressed in number of texel. Should be within `[10 .. 64]`
- `VIEWPORT_START_COLUMN` : Column number of top left corner of viewport within `[2 .. 80 - VIEWPORT_WIDTH]`
- `VIEWPORT_START_LINE` : Line number of top left corner of viewport  within `[0 .. 64 - VIEWPORT_HEIGHT]`

The typical viewport configuration for fullscreen rendering on an Oric is the following one:

``` python
HFOV_IN_DEGREES         = 112
VIEWPORT_WIDTH          = 78
VIEWPORT_HEIGHT         = 64
VIEWPORT_START_COLUMN   = 2
VIEWPORT_START_LINE     = 0
```

The possible values can be deduced from Oric screen capabilities:

Oric Hires screen has a 240x200 resolution. If we group pixel by group of 3x3, there can be 80*66 of such texels.
64 being a nicer value than 66, the screen resolution is set to 80x64 texels.

Actually, it is not possible to use all 80 column of the viewport because first columns on screen are going to host the `CHANGE_COLOR` attribute that distribute RGB components along scanlines.
That's the reason why the `VIEWPORT_START_COLUMN` is set to 2; not to overwrite attribute previously written at the beginning of each scan line. 

For better performance with smaller rendering, one can consider using this configuration.

``` python
HFOV_IN_DEGREES         = 70
VIEWPORT_WIDTH          = 40
VIEWPORT_HEIGHT         = 40
VIEWPORT_START_COLUMN   = 20
VIEWPORT_START_LINE     = 0
```

A good compromise can be following configuration:

``` python
HFOV_IN_DEGREES         = 100
VIEWPORT_WIDTH          = 64
VIEWPORT_HEIGHT         = 64
VIEWPORT_START_COLUMN   = 8
VIEWPORT_START_LINE     = 0
```

When file `config.py` is changed, it is required to run script `build.bat` to regenerate all precomputed tables.

```shell
build.bat
```


--- 
## Scene <a name="scene"></a>

### Scene description

[[scene_describe]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=scene_describe)

A scene is basically a list of walls that make a place we want to render on screen. And describing the scene consists in giving:
- coordinates of walls'extremities named `points`
- link between this points that make wall
- texture to be applied on wall

**CAUTION**: Walls can't be longer than 24 units and must be either (O,y) aligned or (O,x) aligned (i.e their extremities' points share either the sameX or the same Y coordinate).


These informations are stored in tables:
- `lPointsX[pointId]` and `lPointsY[pointId]` which respectively contains X and Y coordinates of points 
- `lWallsPt1[wallId]` and `lWallsPt2[wallId]` which contains index of extremities point as entry in tables `lPointsX` and `lPointsY`
- `wallTexture[]` which contains pointers to buffer containing texture assigned to wall.

Thus, given a wall number `wallId`, it is possible to retrieve all information for this wall with the following code:

```C

// Retrieve point index
unsigned char P1, P2;
P1 = lWallsPt1[wallId] // pointId of extremity 1 of wall wallId
P2 = lWallsPt2[wallId] // pointId of extremity 2 of wall wallId

// Retrieve X and Y coordinates of each extremity
signed char P1X, P1Y, P2X, P2Y;
P1X = lPointsX[P1] // X coordinates of extremity 1
P1Y = lPointsY[P1] // Y coordinates of extremity 1
P2X = lPointsX[P2] // X coordinates of extremity 2
P2Y = lPointsY[P2] // Y coordinates of extremity 2

// Retrieve the buffer of the texture to be applied on this wall
unsigned char *ptr_texture;
ptr_texture = wallTexture [wallId];
```` 

### Scene loading

[[scene_load]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=scene_load)

To ease the description of scene content, a function named `initScene (signed char sceneData[])`is provided in file [proto/c/scene.c](proto/c/scene.c).
This function loads the tables `lWallsPt1`, `lWallsPt2`, `lPointsX` and `lPointsY` with data coming from a simpler description format shown below:

```C
signed char scene_00[] = {

    /* nbPoints = */ 4, /* nbWall = */ 4
	, -6, -6	 	// P0
	, -6,  6		// P1
	,  6,  6		// P2
	,  6, -6		// P3
	, 0, 1   // W0
	, 1, 2   // W1
	, 2, 3   // W2
	, 3, 0   // W2

};
```
In this format:
- the first byte is the number `NP` of point,
- the second bytes is the number `NW` of wall,
- the `NP`*2 next bytes are X,Y coordinates of points,

- the `NW`*2 next bytes are indexes of the two points extremities of wall.


**CAUTION:** If you plan to animate scene'elements you have to manipulate values in tables `lWallsPt1`, `lWallsPt2`, `lPointsX` and `lPointsY`. do not try to animate things in scene data `scene_00` for this table is only used at init stap to preload scene geometry in raycasting input buffers.


--- 
## Raycasting <a name="raycast"></a>

[[lookup_generate]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=lookup_generate)

Raycasting is a rendering technique to create a 3D perspective in a 2D map.
It consists in splitting the viewport into many angular slices and cast a ray on each of these slices to determine at which distance the ray is going to hit a wall. From the distance between camera and the hit wall, we deduce the height on screen of this wall in the given slice. 


The figure below desribes the dataflow involed in raycasting and rendering process:

```
        lPointsX, lPointsY, lWallsPt1, lWallsPt2, wallTexture
                      |    |
                      |    |      rayProcessPoints();
RAYCASTING           \|    |/
==========            \    /      rayProcessWalls();
                       \  /
                         V
        raywall, TableVerticalPos, tabTexCol
                      |    |
RENDERING            \|    |/
=========             \    /      drawWalls();
                       \  /
                         V
              
              texels on screen
````

The following C code shows hos it may be implemented in a typical gameloop.

``` C
    while (running) {

        // Deal with player interaction
        player ();

        // Do the ray casting
        rayInitCasting();
        rayProcessPoints();
        rayProcessWalls();

        // TODO: Clean the Viewport Here ..

        // Render the result of ray casting
        drawWalls();

    }
```

- `rayInitCasting()`, `rayProcessPoints()` and `rayProcessWalls()` are entry points to cast rays on each direction and retrieve wall to be displayed at each slice.
- `drawWalls()` is the procedure to actually draw the wall on screen with texels. 

Let's see how each part of the process is done.

### Casting the ray

The raycasting system of castoric take as input

- The scene geometry defined through : `lPointsX`, `lPointsY`, `lWallsPt1` and `lWallsPt2`
- The camera position and orientation : `rayCamPosX`, `rayCamPosY` and `rayCamRotZ`

And, based on these informations, it mainly computes 3 tables indexed by slice number:

```C
unsigned char    raywall[NUMBER_OF_SLICE];
unsigned char    TableVerticalPos[NUMBER_OF_SLICE];
unsigned char    tabTexCol[NUMBER_OF_SLICE];
```

which content are decribed below:

- `raywall[sliceId]` : contains the wall index (in tables lWallsPtX) that should be displayed on slice `sliceIdx` of viewport or 255 is no wall is seen on this slice.
- `TableVerticalPos[sliceId]` : contains the height on screen of the wall part that should be drawn on this slice. It reflects the distance.
- `tabTexCol[sliceId]` :  contains the column index in the texture that must be drawn on this slice. 




### Render the scene <a name="render"></a>

rendering the scene consists in running through all slice in viewport and, for each slice `sliceId`, draw a slice at offset `tabTexCol[sliceId]`of the texture for wall number `raywall[sliceId]` with height `TableVerticalPos[sliceId]`.

This is done by a call to the `drawWalls` function.

```
        // Render the result of ray casting
        drawWalls();
```



--- 
## Texel <a name="texel"></a>

[[texel_codec]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=texel_codec)

Texels are groups of 3*3 pixels on screen. 3 scanlines for RGB components by 3 pixels.

Colors are obtained by combining Red Green Blue components within a texel across scanline on screen.

Since Oric graphic screen works with 6 bits per bytes in memory screen, two texels share the same memory cell. We call them left / right texel.

A texel can be obtained from a pixel in texture by;
- extracting RGB components of this pixel,
- encoding each 3 components on a 2 bits value ,
- arranging thoses groups of two bits in the 6 least significant bits of a byte.

As shown in the following python code extracted from the script that convert texture image file to C buffer definition : [tools/texture2buf.py](tools/texture2buf.py).

```python 
    ## Open image file and get RGB 
    im = Image.open(filepathname)
    rgb_im = im.convert('RGB')

    ## compute texel value of pixel at position (ii, jj) in image
    r, g, b = rgb_im.getpixel((ii, jj))
    texel_value = (r//85)*16 + (g//85)*4 + (b//85)
```

A typical way to draw the previously computed `texel_value` at position (`line`, `column`) on screen is to use a code similar to the following one:

```C
// tables to convert rgb components into pixel 
unsigned char encodeRightColor = [ 0, 2, 5, 7 ]
// Left side texel include attribute that turn on drawing
unsigned char encodeLeftColor = [ (0<<3)|0x40, (2<<3)|0x40, (5<<3)|0x40, (7<<3)|0x40]

    // retrieve the color components from the color value
    r = (texel_value>>4)& 0x03;
    g = (texel_value>>2)& 0x03;
    b = (texel_value)& 0x03;

    // compute the address where to write the texel
    adr = (unsigned char *)(HIRES_SCREEN_ADDRESS + (line*3)*NEXT_SCANLINE_INCREMENT + (column>>1));

    // if texel is left or right
    if ((column&0x01) == 0){
        *adr |= encodeLeftColor[r];
        adr += NEXT_SCANLINE_INCREMENT;
        *adr |= encodeLeftColor[g];
        adr += NEXT_SCANLINE_INCREMENT;
        *adr |= encodeLeftColor[b];
    } else {
        *adr |= encodeRightColor[r];
        adr += NEXT_SCANLINE_INCREMENT;
        *adr |= encodeRightColor[g];
        adr += NEXT_SCANLINE_INCREMENT;
        *adr |= encodeRightColor[b];
    }
```

--- 

## Textures <a name="texture"></a>

[[texture_file2buffer]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=texture_file2buffer)

|||
|--|--|
| Textures are 32*32 pixels PNG or BMP files stored in [img](img) directory. For example this image [made by rax](https://forum.defence-force.org/viewtopic.php?p=24170#p24170) ![img/christmas.bmp](img/christmas.bmp) that you can see a zoomed version beside | <img src="img/christmas.bmp" alt="drawing" width="400"/>|

These textures files are first converted into buffer with the script [texture2buf.py](tools/texture2buf.py) called in [build.bat](build.bat).



```shell
python tools\texture2buf.py img\christmas.bmp > proto\c\texture_christmas.h
```

This command generates a file `texture_christmas.h` defining a buffer corresponding to a C version of the image.

```c
unsigned char texture_christmas[] = {
	60, 60, 60, 60, 60, 51, 0, 12, 12, 12, 12, 12, 51, ... , 60, 60
};
```

This file is then included in scene description file [scene.c](proto/c/scene.c)

```c
#include "texture_christmas.h"
```

In order for the texture to be assigned to the wall in scene.
```C
unsigned char *wallTexture[] = {
	texture_christmas		// W0
	, texture_XXXX		    // W1
};
```

Commit message:

remove build script from "getting started" part

README.md, after:

# Ray Casting System for Oric Computers

## Getting started

If you have [git](https://git-scm.com/downloads) installed on your PC, you can download the current version with the command:

``` bat
git clone https://github.com/oric-software/castoric
```

If you don't have git, you can download an archive of the projet by clicking the download link provided on [this page](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric).

Once the repository is retrieved or the archive uncompressed, you should have a directory named `castoric` (or `castoric-main` if you downloaded the archive) created into which you can go:

```bat
cd castoric
```

Once in the directory, run the following commands to build and run the prototype:

```bat
cd proto\c 

osdk_build.bat && osdk_execute.bat
```




## Getting deeper into castoric

- [Camera](#camera)

- [Viewport](#viewport)

- [Scene](#scene)

- [Raycast](#raycast)

- [Render](#render)

- [Texel](#texel)

- [Texture](#texture)


--- 
## Camera <a name="camera"></a>

[[camera_situation]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=camera_situation)


Camera is the point from which the scene is beeing seen.
It is stored in three bytes:
- `rayCamPosX`  and `rayCamPosY` are signed 2D cartesian coordinates that belong to interval `[-128 .. 127]`
- `rayCamRotZ` is a signed angle within `[-128 .. 127]`

``` C
signed char             rayCamPosX = 0;
signed char             rayCamPosY = 0;
signed char             rayCamRotZ = 0;
```

One other variable that has to be maintained when the camera angle is changed is the angle at which the raycasting start.

It is stored in a variable named `RayLeftAlpha` and should be set the following way each time the value of `rayCamRotZ` is changed.

``` C
signed char RayLeftAlpha = rayCamRotZ+ HALF_FOV_FIX_ANGLE;
```


which basically reflects that the leftmost angle of the field of view is camera angle + half the size of the field of view.

The constant `HALF_FOV_FIX_ANGLE` is automatically elaborated by script `build.bat` depending on the configuration of the viewport. 


--- 
## Viewport Configuration <a name="viewport"></a>

[[config_viewport]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=config_viewport)


[[config_generate]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=config_generate)


The viewport is the part of the screen where we want the scene to be rendered. Dimensions and position of this viewport are configured in file `tools/config.py` expressed in [Texel]((#texel)) (which are basiclaly 3*3 pixels square on screen).  

Viewport is configured through following parameters:


- `HFOV_IN_DEGREES` : is the angle of Horizontal Field Of View expressed in degrees.
- `VIEWPORT_WIDTH`  : expressed in number of texel. It is the number of column. It must belong to interval `[24 .. 78]`
- `VIEWPORT_HEIGHT`  : expressed in number of texel. Should be within `[10 .. 64]`
- `VIEWPORT_START_COLUMN` : Column number of top left corner of viewport within `[2 .. 80 - VIEWPORT_WIDTH]`
- `VIEWPORT_START_LINE` : Line number of top left corner of viewport  within `[0 .. 64 - VIEWPORT_HEIGHT]`

The typical viewport configuration for fullscreen rendering on an Oric is the following one:

``` python
HFOV_IN_DEGREES         = 112
VIEWPORT_WIDTH          = 78
VIEWPORT_HEIGHT         = 64
VIEWPORT_START_COLUMN   = 2
VIEWPORT_START_LINE     = 0
```

The possible values can be deduced from Oric screen capabilities:

Oric Hires screen has a 240x200 resolution. If we group pixel by group of 3x3, there can be 80*66 of such texels.
64 being a nicer value than 66, the screen resolution is set to 80x64 texels.

Actually, it is not possible to use all 80 column of the viewport because first columns on screen are going to host the `CHANGE_COLOR` attribute that distribute RGB components along scanlines.
That's the reason why the `VIEWPORT_START_COLUMN` is set to 2; not to overwrite attribute previously written at the beginning of each scan line. 

For better performance with smaller rendering, one can consider using this configuration.

``` python
HFOV_IN_DEGREES         = 70
VIEWPORT_WIDTH          = 40
VIEWPORT_HEIGHT         = 40
VIEWPORT_START_COLUMN   = 20
VIEWPORT_START_LINE     = 0
```

A good compromise can be following configuration:

``` python
HFOV_IN_DEGREES         = 100
VIEWPORT_WIDTH          = 64
VIEWPORT_HEIGHT         = 64
VIEWPORT_START_COLUMN   = 8
VIEWPORT_START_LINE     = 0
```

When file `config.py` is changed, it is required to run script `build.bat` to regenerate all precomputed tables.

```shell
build.bat
```


--- 
## Scene <a name="scene"></a>

### Scene description

[[scene_describe]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=scene_describe)

A scene is basically a list of walls that make a place we want to render on screen. And describing the scene consists in giving:
- coordinates of walls'extremities named `points`
- link between this points that make wall
- texture to be applied on wall

**CAUTION**: Walls can't be longer than 24 units and must be either (O,y) aligned or (O,x) aligned (i.e their extremities' points share either the sameX or the same Y coordinate).


These informations are stored in tables:
- `lPointsX[pointId]` and `lPointsY[pointId]` which respectively contains X and Y coordinates of points 
- `lWallsPt1[wallId]` and `lWallsPt2[wallId]` which contains index of extremities point as entry in tables `lPointsX` and `lPointsY`
- `wallTexture[]` which contains pointers to buffer containing texture assigned to wall.

Thus, given a wall number `wallId`, it is possible to retrieve all information for this wall with the following code:

```C

// Retrieve point index
unsigned char P1, P2;
P1 = lWallsPt1[wallId] // pointId of extremity 1 of wall wallId
P2 = lWallsPt2[wallId] // pointId of extremity 2 of wall wallId

// Retrieve X and Y coordinates of each extremity
signed char P1X, P1Y, P2X, P2Y;
P1X = lPointsX[P1] // X coordinates of extremity 1
P1Y = lPointsY[P1] // Y coordinates of extremity 1
P2X = lPointsX[P2] // X coordinates of extremity 2
P2Y = lPointsY[P2] // Y coordinates of extremity 2

// Retrieve the buffer of the texture to be applied on this wall
unsigned char *ptr_texture;
ptr_texture = wallTexture [wallId];
```` 

### Scene loading

[[scene_load]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=scene_load)

To ease the description of scene content, a function named `initScene (signed char sceneData[])`is provided in file [proto/c/scene.c](proto/c/scene.c).
This function loads the tables `lWallsPt1`, `lWallsPt2`, `lPointsX` and `lPointsY` with data coming from a simpler description format shown below:

```C
signed char scene_00[] = {

    /* nbPoints = */ 4, /* nbWall = */ 4
	, -6, -6	 	// P0
	, -6,  6		// P1
	,  6,  6		// P2
	,  6, -6		// P3
	, 0, 1   // W0
	, 1, 2   // W1
	, 2, 3   // W2
	, 3, 0   // W2

};
```
In this format:
- the first byte is the number `NP` of point,
- the second bytes is the number `NW` of wall,
- the `NP`*2 next bytes are X,Y coordinates of points,

- the `NW`*2 next bytes are indexes of the two points extremities of wall.


**CAUTION:** If you plan to animate scene'elements you have to manipulate values in tables `lWallsPt1`, `lWallsPt2`, `lPointsX` and `lPointsY`. do not try to animate things in scene data `scene_00` for this table is only used at init stap to preload scene geometry in raycasting input buffers.


--- 
## Raycasting <a name="raycast"></a>

[[lookup_generate]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=lookup_generate)

Raycasting is a rendering technique to create a 3D perspective in a 2D map.
It consists in splitting the viewport into many angular slices and cast a ray on each of these slices to determine at which distance the ray is going to hit a wall. From the distance between camera and the hit wall, we deduce the height on screen of this wall in the given slice. 


The figure below desribes the dataflow involed in raycasting and rendering process:

```
        lPointsX, lPointsY, lWallsPt1, lWallsPt2, wallTexture
                      |    |
                      |    |      rayProcessPoints();
RAYCASTING           \|    |/
==========            \    /      rayProcessWalls();
                       \  /
                         V
        raywall, TableVerticalPos, tabTexCol
                      |    |
RENDERING            \|    |/
=========             \    /      drawWalls();
                       \  /
                         V
              
              texels on screen
````

The following C code shows hos it may be implemented in a typical gameloop.

``` C
    while (running) {

        // Deal with player interaction
        player ();

        // Do the ray casting
        rayInitCasting();
        rayProcessPoints();
        rayProcessWalls();

        // TODO: Clean the Viewport Here ..

        // Render the result of ray casting
        drawWalls();

    }
```

- `rayInitCasting()`, `rayProcessPoints()` and `rayProcessWalls()` are entry points to cast rays on each direction and retrieve wall to be displayed at each slice.
- `drawWalls()` is the procedure to actually draw the wall on screen with texels. 

Let's see how each part of the process is done.

### Casting the ray

The raycasting system of castoric take as input

- The scene geometry defined through : `lPointsX`, `lPointsY`, `lWallsPt1` and `lWallsPt2`
- The camera position and orientation : `rayCamPosX`, `rayCamPosY` and `rayCamRotZ`

And, based on these informations, it mainly computes 3 tables indexed by slice number:

```C
unsigned char    raywall[NUMBER_OF_SLICE];
unsigned char    TableVerticalPos[NUMBER_OF_SLICE];
unsigned char    tabTexCol[NUMBER_OF_SLICE];
```

which content are decribed below:

- `raywall[sliceId]` : contains the wall index (in tables lWallsPtX) that should be displayed on slice `sliceIdx` of viewport or 255 is no wall is seen on this slice.
- `TableVerticalPos[sliceId]` : contains the height on screen of the wall part that should be drawn on this slice. It reflects the distance.
- `tabTexCol[sliceId]` :  contains the column index in the texture that must be drawn on this slice. 




### Render the scene <a name="render"></a>

rendering the scene consists in running through all slice in viewport and, for each slice `sliceId`, draw a slice at offset `tabTexCol[sliceId]`of the texture for wall number `raywall[sliceId]` with height `TableVerticalPos[sliceId]`.

This is done by a call to the `drawWalls` function.

```
        // Render the result of ray casting
        drawWalls();
```



--- 
## Texel <a name="texel"></a>

[[texel_codec]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=texel_codec)

Texels are groups of 3*3 pixels on screen. 3 scanlines for RGB components by 3 pixels.

Colors are obtained by combining Red Green Blue components within a texel across scanline on screen.

Since Oric graphic screen works with 6 bits per bytes in memory screen, two texels share the same memory cell. We call them left / right texel.

A texel can be obtained from a pixel in texture by;
- extracting RGB components of this pixel,
- encoding each 3 components on a 2 bits value ,
- arranging thoses groups of two bits in the 6 least significant bits of a byte.

As shown in the following python code extracted from the script that convert texture image file to C buffer definition : [tools/texture2buf.py](tools/texture2buf.py).

```python 
    ## Open image file and get RGB 
    im = Image.open(filepathname)
    rgb_im = im.convert('RGB')

    ## compute texel value of pixel at position (ii, jj) in image
    r, g, b = rgb_im.getpixel((ii, jj))
    texel_value = (r//85)*16 + (g//85)*4 + (b//85)
```

A typical way to draw the previously computed `texel_value` at position (`line`, `column`) on screen is to use a code similar to the following one:

```C
// tables to convert rgb components into pixel 
unsigned char encodeRightColor = [ 0, 2, 5, 7 ]
// Left side texel include attribute that turn on drawing
unsigned char encodeLeftColor = [ (0<<3)|0x40, (2<<3)|0x40, (5<<3)|0x40, (7<<3)|0x40]

    // retrieve the color components from the color value
    r = (texel_value>>4)& 0x03;
    g = (texel_value>>2)& 0x03;
    b = (texel_value)& 0x03;

    // compute the address where to write the texel
    adr = (unsigned char *)(HIRES_SCREEN_ADDRESS + (line*3)*NEXT_SCANLINE_INCREMENT + (column>>1));

    // if texel is left or right
    if ((column&0x01) == 0){
        *adr |= encodeLeftColor[r];
        adr += NEXT_SCANLINE_INCREMENT;
        *adr |= encodeLeftColor[g];
        adr += NEXT_SCANLINE_INCREMENT;
        *adr |= encodeLeftColor[b];
    } else {
        *adr |= encodeRightColor[r];
        adr += NEXT_SCANLINE_INCREMENT;
        *adr |= encodeRightColor[g];
        adr += NEXT_SCANLINE_INCREMENT;
        *adr |= encodeRightColor[b];
    }
```

--- 

## Textures <a name="texture"></a>

[[texture_file2buffer]](https://github.com/oric-software/castoric/search?q=texture_file2buffer)

|||
|--|--|
| Textures are 32*32 pixels PNG or BMP files stored in [img](img) directory. For example this image [made by rax](https://forum.defence-force.org/viewtopic.php?p=24170#p24170) ![img/christmas.bmp](img/christmas.bmp) that you can see a zoomed version beside | <img src="img/christmas.bmp" alt="drawing" width="400"/>|

These textures files are first converted into buffer with the script [texture2buf.py](tools/texture2buf.py) called in [build.bat](build.bat).



```shell
python tools\texture2buf.py img\christmas.bmp > proto\c\texture_christmas.h
```

This command generates a file `texture_christmas.h` defining a buffer corresponding to a C version of the image.

```c
unsigned char texture_christmas[] = {
	60, 60, 60, 60, 60, 51, 0, 12, 12, 12, 12, 12, 51, ... , 60, 60
};
```

This file is then included in scene description file [scene.c](proto/c/scene.c)

```c
#include "texture_christmas.h"
```

In order for the texture to be assigned to the wall in scene.
```C
unsigned char *wallTexture[] = {
	texture_christmas		// W0
	, texture_XXXX		    // W1
};
```
